In the last lecture, we saw an array based
implementation of the union find data structure,
in which the find operation to constant time
and we use an amortized analysis to claim
that the union operation over a sequence of
m unions would take m log m time. So, effectively
each union was a logarithmic time operation,
amortised over the entire sequence. Now, we
will see a more sophisticated implementation
which has even better complexity.
So, recall that the union find data structure
keep track of a partition of a set S and supports
three operations. One is the make union find
which creates a trivial partition, where each
elements belongs to it is own, each element
is in a singleton partition named by itself.
So, we use the same names for the partitions
and the elements, so each s in a partition
called S each small s. Find tells us which
partition a given element belongs to and union
combines two components or two partitions
into a single one.
So, the array based implementation uses an
array called component to tell us which component
each element belongs to, it keeps an array
of list to tell us which elements belongs
to each components. So, it is a kind of reverse
mapping, for each component k it tells us
which members of the set belong to that. And
finally, it keeps track of the size of each
component, because we merged components by
taking smaller once and relabeling them with
the name of the bigger once. So, make union
find was an order n operation, find was an
order one operation and the amortized complexity
of the union operation was log m for a sequence
of m operations.
So, we will now have a different representation,
we will use nodes with pointers. So, each
element of the set will now be represented
as a node, the node will have two parts, it
will have the name which is the element that
you are keeping track of and a label part
which keeps track of its component, so it
is a pointer to the component. Now, remember
that the names of the components are the names
of the elements. So, if we have a name here
for example, we have name j it says that this
node represents the element j and its label
points back to itself, so it says this is
j belongs to the component j.
Here on the other hand, we have the element
i and through this feel we go to the first
node which points to itself and this set that
a i belongs to component j. So, i belong to
component j, so we are read a kind of we are
making heavy use of the fact that the names
of the elements and the names of the components
are the same. So, we are kind of in some context,
we are interpreting the name field as name
of the element and when you following pointers,
we are interpreting the name field as a name
of the component.
So, make union find is the initialization,
so what it does is, it will set up each component
as a single term containing an element of
the same name. So, i belongs to the components
i, so there is a node i which points to itself,
then there is a node k which points to itself
indicating this is a component called k containing
k, this is the components called j containing
j. So, we have n such components 1 to n, so
we have n such nodes each of which contains
the name in the first component and a pointer
to itself in the second component saying it
is a singleton component.
So, after a period of time we will see that
when we merge node, these pointers will point
instead of themselves it will point to other
things. So, here for example, could be a component
containing i, j, k and l and the structures
says that the name of the component is actually
j. So, this is the component j and it contains
i, j, k, l, so you can see that the element
i has a pointer not to itself, but to another
nodes. So, if you follow this we find that
it is pointing to an element j which points
to itself, so it is name of the component
of i is j.
Similarly, for l if we start from l, l points
to i, i points to j and so on, so we will
see that this is how we will use to this is
a strategy, we use to implement find. We have
to start with the node and go up the path
and this will be a tree, so every path will
end up the root and the root will be the name
of the component.
So, just to help us navigate this tree a little
easier, let us assume that we have the following
additional arrays of pointers and numbers.
So, we will keep track first of all of where
each node is. So, we have an array called
node here and each element of the array is
a pointer to the node containing that element.
So, the entry i says node i is here, entry
j says the node j is here and so on. So, there
will correspondingly be an entry which says
that node k is here and node l is here and
so on.
So, every element in our actual set will have
a pointer from this node array to the actual
node in the tree, when the set of tree is
set of components, the actual node where that
value lies, then we need to know which of
the components which are currently active.
So, here in this particular segment i, j,
k, l which are the component to j, there use
to be a component to i, i when i was initialize
the use to be a component k, the use to be
component l. But, these names are no longer
in use, because these components have a got
merged directly or indirectly with j.
So, right know among i, j, k, l only j remains,
so we say that the root of j is, the component
j is the node containing j and for all the
other labels i, j, k and l, we say that i,
k, and l there is no component called i there
is no component called k, so we just have
a blank same, saying there is no root for
these things. So, if you want to find the
root of this component, go to the node i and
then work your way up to it.
Finally, we will use a similar strategy as
before in terms of merging by size, so we
will just explicitly keep track of the size
of each component. So, here it is says that
size of this components i, j, k, l is 4 because
there are currently 4 elements. So, we have
this node pointer which points to each element
in the set where it currently lies, which
node contains that element. We have a root
pointer which tells us for each component
which is currently active in our partition,
which is the root of that partition and then
we have the size which tells us the size of
each component.
So, when we do union we basically do this
merging of the smaller one to the larger one.
So, here we have two components, we have component
j which is j, k and m and we have component
i which is i and l. So, now we want to do
the union of i and j, so now we first will
somewhere we will have recorded that the size
of i is 2 and the size of j is 3. So, having
recorded this, we have to now therefore merge
i into j.
So, what this means is that this edge which
says that i is a root of the string has to
be destroyed and instead we have to put a
link like this and merge these two trees and
to one larger tree.
So, if we do that this is the resulting tree,
now we have a single component called j of
course, we would have updated the size of
j to be the size of i plus the whole size
of j. So, now it will say 5 instead of 3 and
notice that this whole operation is an order
1 operation, because we take a fixed number
of steps to find out the sizes of the two
components to find the roots of the two components
and decide which root to massage into which
other root.
So, whether to make i point to j or j point
to i, so this is an order 1 operation and
that is because we have the size information
tell us the size, we do not have a go through
the component to find it size and we have
this root information it directly tells us
where the roots of the two partition are.
So, which is we have to go directly to that
place and make one point to the other or vice
versa.
Now, find on the other hand as we saw requires
us to start from the value that we want to
check and work away up to them. So, supposing
we say find of you, then remember that will
have this node array and so node of u will
say that the node containing u is here. So,
we will start there and then we will follow
this path, so we will say this points here
and this points here and this points here
and finally, when we reach a node which point
to itself that is the name.
So, then we will say therefore, it find of
u equal to j, so this takes time proportional
to the path that we traverse from the node
to the root. Now, remember initially we had
a path for u which looks like this, so initially
every node has a path of length 1 to itself
saying that it is its own root. Now, why does
this path change it changes, because of the
union operation, every time we do a union
1 node which use to point to itself, now points
to another node and everything below it as
it is path increase by 1.
So, therefore, the path increases by 1 every
time the label of j changes, if you going
to go from a find of j from j to the root,
how much time this takes changes by 1 each
time j changes it is label. But, as before
we are doubling the component size, which
time we merge. So, which time we do an union,
then label containing j contains twice as
many element as a did before.
Now finally, the best you can do is to combine
all the nodes in your graph into a single
component, the maximum component size is n.
So, therefore, we start with a component to
size 1, then we double it to 2 and we double
it to 4 and eventually we cannot go past n.
So, this whole thing can be at most log n
steps, so therefore log n times the label
of j can change, each time the label changes,
because we take the root of another component
attach it here, the path link increasing by
1.
So, the path length increases 1 plus 1 plus
1 log n times, so the path is at most log
n. So, with this analysis we can see that,
because we are merging smaller components
and to larger components find will take log
n time.
So, we are now at a place where we are dual
to the earlier data structure, in the earlier
data structure with arrays. So, we had find,
was a constant time operation and we had is
amortized analysis that said that union was
log n, now we have this pointer base think
which says that union is order 1, but find
is order log n. So, it is use that we have
got essentially as similar kind of structure,
except that we are reverse the complicity
of the two operations.
Now, turns out that we can do something much
more cleaver an actually make it even more
efficient to find. So, we can keep the order
one of course, for union, but order log n
can actually be reduced. So, the key is that
once we have traversed this path from u to
j, we know is some sense that not only do
you know that the path containing to component
containing u is j, we know the component containing
l is j you also know the component containing
i is j.
So, why do not we make use of this information
and not recomputed each time we come back.
So, what we will do is, we will do the usual
find j, so we will traverse the path and then
we will go back from j to the root and say
now I know this is j. So, let me bypass is
whole in may be point directly to j, so I
have remove the earlier things.
So, I will remove this edge and directly go,
similarly before I remove of the go there.
So, I will say I can remove this edge directly,
so for each step I can remove until I finally,
reach the one with just below the root. So,
basically now I will end up having a flat
tree along this path, this path it use is
look like this it not been flattened out like
this. So, every think now has a directed access
to the path, so we have flattening the tree.
So, if you want to look at the pictorially,
so I start with this.
And then if I look at the current situation,
then I will replace this edge from u to l
as an edge from u to j directly.
Then, I will replace the edge from l to i
as an edge from l to j directly and so now
I am end up this flat tree. So, now subsequent
look up, so I am going to take only one step
from u and l.
So, the first find takes log n time, then
it takes constant time, so now you can actually
show I mean is this is not an easy calculation.
So, we are have not going to try and attempt
it now, but after this you can show that just
like we can do an amortised analysis for in
the earlier array based implementation to
get an overall log n, m log n, cost m log
m cost for m union operations. Here, you can
actually show that a total of n finds will
actually take something almost linear in n.
Almost linear in n is actually n times of
function called alpha of n and this alpha
of n is something which is the inverse of
the Ackermann function, the Ackermann function
is something which grows very fast. So, it
is a function which grows faster than any
explanation, now this is like the log of the
inverse Ackermann, I mean the log of Ackermann.
So, you know that for the exponential function,
the inverse is the log. So, that is why log
n is nice for us, it is slow log of 1000 is
10, log of 1 billion is 20, 1 million is 20,
log of 1 billion is 30 it was very slowly,
because in other directions growing fast 2
to the power 10, 2 to the power of 20, 2 to
the power of 30 goes very fast.
So, similarly Ackermann goes very fast, so
if you take what is the corresponding log
function, for what value is this the Ackermann
inputs it grows very slowly. In fact, it is
claim that alpha of n is at most 4 for any
value of n that you are likely to encountered
in a practical computing problem that you
can solve.
So, you can think of this has been something
like order n, because we know that alpha of
n is less than equal to 4. So, this is like
4 n, so path compression gives as a drastic
reduction from n log n which we would get
without path compression to something which
is linear. So, therefore, now by moving to
this pointer base thing, we have actually
achieved a considerable saving compare to
the more direct array based implementation
that behave in the last lecture.
So, to summarise if we implement union find
using nodes with pointers, then we can do
of course, the initial set of that make union
find and linear time, union now becomes a
order 1 operation. Because, we just directly
access the two roots and merge this smaller
root with the bigger root and find now if
you use this path compression trick, although
and principle it is n log n for n operations,
it is n alpha n for n operations if we use
path compression.